# HL7 CQL Packager

A .NET tool that packages CQL, ELM, and build outputs into a FHIR Library resource.


## Online Documentation

Please note that the public [online documentation for the CQL Packager](https://docs.fire.ly/projects/Firely-NET-SDK/en/latest/cql/cql-packager.html)
is in maintained in another repository: [Online PackagerCLI docs](https://github.com/FirelyTeam/firely-docs-firely-net-sdk/tree/master/cql).

Whenever making changes to the documentation, please ensure that you update the the online documentation as well.

## Overview

The HL7 CQL Packager performs the following steps:

1. **CQL to ELM Conversion**: Converts CQL files into ELM JSON files. Please read the disclaimer in the help documentation.
2. **ELM to C#**: Converts ELM JSON files into LINQ expressions, then translates those into C# code.
3. **C# to .NET DLL Compilation**: Compiles the generated C# code into a single assembly per ELM file.
4. **Packaging to FHIR Libraries/Measures**: Packages the assembly 
   (and optionally the original CQL, ELM, and C# source code) into a FHIR Library resource, 
   creating one resource per original ELM file. 
   Where applicable, FHIR Measure resources are also generated.

## Getting Started

### Installation

Install the packager tool globally using the following command:

```shell
dotnet tool install Hl7.Cql.Packager --global --prerelease
```

> **Note**: The `--prerelease` option is required because only prerelease versions are currently available.

## Usage

Get help for the command line tool by running any of the following commands:

```shell
cql-package --help
cql-package cql --help
cql-package elm --help
```

### Disclaimer

The CQL to ELM conversion process by the `cql` command 
is currently in an early stage of development and only supports basic cql translation. 
**It is NOT PRODUCTION READY.**
If you encounter issues with the CQL to ELM conversion, 
please log them in the [Firely CQL SDK issue tracker](https://github.com/FirelyTeam/firely-cql-sdk/issues)

We HIGHLY recommend using the `elm` command to package ELM files that have been generated by the CQL to ELM Java Toolking 
(see the getting-started.md documentation for more information, and the [Java Tooling README](https://github.com/cqframework/clinical_quality_language/blob/master/Src/java/README.md#generate-an-elm-representation-of-cql-logic)).

The version of the Java Tooling that is used to generate the ELM files must be compatible with the version of the CQL Packager you are using.
For more information, see the Disclaimer section in the help documentation when running `cql-package --help`.


### Examples

1. Package ELM into FHIR resources (as indented JSON) and save C# source code:

```shell
cql-package elm --elm input\elm --cql input\cql --fhir output\fhir --cs output\csharp --json-pretty
```

- Packages ELM JSON files from the directory `input\elm` into FHIR Library resources saving them to `output\fhir`.
- The CQL files in `input\cql` are included in the FHIR Library resources, if they match the ELM files by file name.
- The generated C# source code is saved to directory `output\csharp`.

2. Package CQL into FHIR resources (as indented JSON) and save C# source code:

```shell
cql-package cql --cql input\cql --fhir output\fhir --cs output\csharp --json-pretty
```

- Packages CQL files from the directory `input\cql` into FHIR Library resources saving them to `output\fhir`.
- The ELM files are included in the FHIR Library resources, but even though they are not selected to be saved to a directory here.
- The generated C# source code is saved to directory `output\csharp`.
- Read the disclaimer in the help.

3. Package ELM into .NET assembly DLL's, which can be stepped through in a debugger:

```shell
cql-package elm --elm input\elm --dll output\dll --debug-symbols Embedded
```

- Compiles ELM JSON files in the directory `input\elm` into .NET assemblies and saving them to `output\dll`.
- The C# and debugging symbols are embedded in the DLLs. The DLLs are compiled without any optimizations.
